Title: For Researchers
Brief: For Researchers
Order: 1500	

# Guide for Researchers

This Guide provides information useful for researchers who wish to use Databrary.

## Gaining access

Some materials on Databrary are available to the public, but access to
most research data requires that a researcher secure formal written authorization
from an institution.

### The Databrary Access Agreement permits data use and data contribution

Databrary restricts access to Authorized Investigators whose
institutions sign a formal [Databrary Access Agreement](|filename|../agreement.md). The Databrary
Access Agreement is the legally binding document that formalizes the
authorization process.

The Databrary Access Agreement combines provisions for data use and data
contribution. Unlike data use agreements that allow specific individuals
access to a particular dataset for a discrete research purpose, the
Databrary Access Agreement allows any Authorized Investigator to access
all shared datasets on Databrary and to use the datasets for many
different institutionally-approved purposes. In addition, the Databrary
Access Agreement permits Authorized Investigators to upload data and to
share it with other Authorized Investigators in accord with the sharing
permissions granted by participants and any required institutional
approvals. Databrary believes that combining data use and data
contribution in a single agreement reduces barriers to data sharing,
meets emerging funder mandates to share research data, and accelerates
progress in research.

### Applying for Institutional Authorization

Individuals who are eligible to conduct independent research, submit
funding proposals as the lead investigator, have Principal Investigator
(PI) status, or have tenure-track faculty positions at their
Institution, may apply to their institution for approval to be named an
Authorized Investigator. To receive authorization, a person must apply
for and receive authorization from their institution; Databrary does not
grant authorization separate from an institution. In the U.S., a college
or university's grants and contracts or sponsored programs office
usually takes responsibility for granting authorization by signing the
Databrary Access Agreement. Databrary staff will work with a researcher
and an institution to secure signatures on the Databrary Access
Agreement. The authorization process typically takes a few days to a few
weeks.

### Research ethics review required prior to authorization approval

Some institutions may refer a researcher's request for authorization to
a research ethics board for review or approval prior to signing the DAA.
In that case, researchers may use [template language](|filename|../templates.md) Databrary has developed to communicate with research ethics boards.

### Seeking research ethics board approval for use

You will need to request permission from your ethics board or IRB for
secondary data use when you move from activities preparatory to research
to actually conducting research.
For example, when you move from
exploring the feasibility of a coding scheme to deciding to apply it
systematically to a set of videos, you would need to submit a request to
your IRB.
You must still protect the data during pre-research or
research planning as you normally would for these sorts of data as
outlined in the Databrary Access Agreement.

> **IS IT RESEARCH?** Keep in mind the following definitions from the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) in the United States:
> 
> *Is it Research?* Research is a "systematic investigation, including research development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge" (45 CFR 46.102(l)).
>
> *Is it a Human Subject?* A human subject is "a living individual about whom an investigator (whether professional or student) conducting research \(i\) obtains information or biospecimens through intervention or interaction with the individual, and uses, studies, or analyzes the information or biospecimens; or \(ii\) obtains, uses, studies, analyzes, or generates identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens" (45 CFR
46.102(e)).
>
> If you can answer YES to these two questions, you need to request permission from your IRB. If you are not sure, contact your ethics board or IRB for guidance.

## Selecting and managing Affiliates

After being authorized by their institution, Authorized Investigators
may then authorize staff, undergraduate or graduate students, and
postdoctoral trainees to access Databrary as Affiliates. In granting a
person Affiliate status, an Authorized Investigator takes responsibility
for that person's use of Databrary.

### Affiliates outside of the Authorized Investigator's Institution

An Authorized Investigator may grant Affiliate status to a person
outside their institution if permitted by that institution. If a person
is eligible to be an Authorized Investigator at their home institution,
that person should apply for access to Databrary through their home
institution. Except in unusual circumstances, researchers eligible to be
Authorized Investigators should not be granted access to Databrary as
the Affiliate of another Authorized Investigator.

Authorized Investigators are responsible for ensuring that Affiliates
have human subjects and/or animal research training appropriate for the
institution and remain in good standing with the institution.

### Affiliate access to an Authorized Investigator's data

Authorized Investigators determine which of the Authorized
Investigator's datasets an Affiliate can access. Authorized
Investigators can set each Affiliate's access to one of the following
levels:

- *No access*: Affiliate cannot access any of the Authorized
    Investigator's data (default).
- *Read-only access*: Affiliate has view access to all of the
    Authorized Investigator's data. (The affiliate may view and
    download videos and other identifying information, including data
    that are not released for sharing.)
- *Read/Write Access*: Affiliate can access and edit the Authorized
    Investigator's datasets. (The affiliate may view, download, add,
    change, and remove data without restriction.)
- *Manager*: Affiliate can access and change permissions on the
    Authorized Investigator's data. The Manager can name other people
    as Affiliates. The Manager may additionally change the access
    controls and sharing levels of the Authorized Investigator's data.
    Manager-level permission should be granted with utmost care.

These levels are analogous to granting an Affiliate different levels of
access to the Authorized Investigator's laboratory data server.
Accordingly, the Investigator must trust Affiliates granted this access
and supervise and manage Affiliates granted these privileges. The
Authorized Investigator must assign an expiration date to each
Affiliate's access.

> **NOTE:**
> Analogous to file-level sharing, new Affiliates have no access to files until an Authorized Investigator grants them access.

### Affiliate access to Databrary

Affiliates can only gain access to data on Databrary that has been
shared by *other* Authorized Investigators if specifically granted that
access by their supervising Authorized Investigator. The Authorized
Investigator must assign an expiration date to each Affiliate's access.

Many Authorized Investigators grant Affiliates access only to datasets
the Authorized Investigator controls, not to other datasets shared on
Databrary. Some Authorized Investigators grant access to datasets shared
on Databrary to senior graduate students, postdoctoral trainees, or
trusted research staff.

### Accessing data shared by other Databrary users

Authorized Investigators automatically have access to data on Databrary
that has been shared by other Authorized Investigators. Affiliates have
access to shared data on Databrary only if granted that access by the
Authorized Investigator who supervises them.

## Contributing data

Only Authorized Investigators and Managers may create new datasets. Only
Authorized Investigators may share datasets with others.

### Types of data shared

#### Non-sensitive/non-identifiable data or materials

Authorized Investigators may upload to Databrary and share
non-identifiable videos of research procedures, computer displays,
research protocols, analysis code, and other research materials without
any additional approvals, provided that sharing these elements with
Databrary does not violate intellectual property rights of any person.
De-identified or pseudonymized research data may be uploaded and shared
subject to institutional policies and approval. If an Authorized
Investigator already has approval to share a de-identified or
pseudonymized dataset with other researchers or with the public, then
sharing that dataset on Databrary is permitted. All files uploaded to
Databrary must be marked with a sharing release level. The default
sharing release level is *Private*. Although many non-sensitive,
de-identified, or pseudonymized data files could be made available to
the public, it may be prudent to share de-identified or pseudonymized
datasets only with Authorized Investigators.

#### Identifiable or sensitive data

Authorized Investigators must make preparations to share identifiable or
sensitive data with Databrary as described below.

##### Securing Institutional approval

Authorized Investigators must secure approval from their institutions
prior to sharing data with Databrary. Institutional approval usually
involves research ethics board or IRB review or its equivalent. Approval
to share data may be included in a new research protocol application or
as an amendment to an existing protocol.

For human subjects data, Databrary recommends adapting the Databrary
Release Template although the exact Databrary Release Template language
is not required. The Databrary Release Template serves as a guideline.
The institutional research ethics board or IRB must determine what
specific language should be used for securing data sharing permission
and whether requesting permission to share data should be part of the
research consent process or separate from it. It is essential that
whatever language and permission process the institution requires
enables the Authorized Investigator to determine clearly what level of
sharing release participants have granted. Authorized Investigators must
be able to assign a sharing release level to each file uploaded to
Databrary that reflects the sharing permission granted by the research
participant.

In some cases, research ethics boards and IRBs have deemed that certain
release language in research consent forms from previously collected
data permits sharing in Databrary. This has allowed archival data
collected prior to the creation of Databrary to be stored and shared in
the library. If an Authorized Investigator has archival data, Databrary
staff are happy to discuss whether and how these might be stored and
shared on the system.

##### Removing data destruction clauses from research consent documents

Researchers and IRBs often have misconceptions about regulations
pertaining to data destruction, especially where video or audio
recordings are concerned. In the U.S., NIH and NSF do not require data
destruction. Data destruction clauses inherently conflict with the
ability to store and share data indefinitely via repositories like
Databrary. Rather than promising to destroy data after some time period
in a research protocol, Databrary recommends the following language:

*"Data will be stored for an indefinite period in a restricted data
library on the internet (databrary.org)."*

##### Obtaining participant release for sharing

After research protocol approval has been granted, Authorized
Investigators may start securing permission from participants and
recording those permissions.

Authorized Investigators must ensure that the process used for obtaining
participant release for sharing meets relevant regulatory requirements,
such as the GDPR.

**Why ask**

Video and audio recordings of participants are inherently identifiable.
Thus, to share identifiable data on Databrary, Authorized Investigators
must secure permission from the people depicted in recordings or images.
Authorized Investigators can share identifiable research recordings (or
other identifiable data elements like birth dates) only when the
Authorized Investigators (a) get approval from their Institutions to do
so, (b) inform participants about what sharing these data elements
means, and (c) secure participants' permission to share. Databrary
calls this data sharing permission a \"release\" because it involves
releasing data for use by other researchers.

**When to ask**

Databrary recommends that Authorized Investigators ask participants for
permission to share at the end of data collection after participants
acquire first-hand knowledge about the study procedures. This ensures
that consent to participate is completely separate from permission to
share and it mitigates the risk that asking participants about sharing
their data will affect their decision about whether to participate in
the research. However, some institutions may prefer to have Authorized
Investigators incorporate data sharing permission into the research
consent process or even to have data sharing permission be part of an
entirely separate protocol. The important and essential point is to
secure sharing permission and record it faithfully.

**How to ask**

To standardize the process of obtaining data sharing releases from
participants---and make it as simple as possible for
researchers---Databrary developed [Databrary Release Templates](|filename|../templates.md)]. The
templates can be added to or incorporated within human subjects research
ethics protocols. The Databrary Release Template was developed and
refined in close consultation with the IRB office at NYU. It gives
researchers a standardized way to obtain the necessary permissions to
share data in Databrary. The template makes it clear and unambiguous to
participants about what agreeing to share data in Databrary will mean.

### Uploading to Databrary

#### What to upload

In addition to video, Databrary can store many types of data and
supplemental files associated with a research project such as images,
displays, stimuli, graphs, protocols, blank questionnaires, coding
manuals, coding spreadsheets, physiological data, imaging data, analysis
code, analysis spreadsheets, and blank consent or release documents.
Databrary permits Authorized Investigators to store any information
permitted by the institution. However, some information poses greater
risks to participants than others, and these should be stored on
Databrary only after special consideration. For example, first or last
names, home location information more specific than state, and contact
information are generally considered high risk for the disclosure of
participants' identities. These data items should **not** be uploaded
to Databrary.

Video and audio recordings may be uploaded to Databrary if the
Authorized Investigator has secured participant (or parent/guardian)
permission and the institution approves. Under some circumstances, an
institution may determine that participant (or parent) permission is not
necessary to store video and audio recordings on Databrary. For example,
for recordings collected a long time in the past, participant (or
parent) permission may be unavailable, and the institution may determine
that the risk to participants is sufficiently low to allow sharing. Or,
an Authorized Investigator may choose to store video and audio
recordings on Databrary for sharing only among collaborators and
Affiliates specifically chosen by the Authorized Investigator, but have
no plans to share the videos with the broader Databrary community. This
use of Databrary is permitted, but discouraged, because the purpose of
Databrary is to foster data sharing beyond an individual research
project or group.

Exact birth dates or test dates may also be considered identifiable data
elements. However, these dates can be highly valuable for future
research uses, and may pose a lower level of risk to participants than
other data elements. Accordingly, Databrary permits storage of exact
dates, but treats exact dates with special care. The system only exposes
exact dates to Authorized Investigators or their Affiliates who upload
the data, and only exposes exact dates in shared datasets if the
participant has agreed to share data (i.e., participant grants sharing
release at the *Authorized User, Learning Audiences, or Public* levels).

Other low risk data items such as race, ethnicity, gender, and related
personal characteristics may be stored on Databrary without specific
permission.

#### Assignment of sharing release level

The only essential item of information required for uploading files to
Databrary is the sharing release level. Authorized Investigators are
responsible for recording participant sharing release permissions and
assigning them to files uploaded to Databrary. Databrary assigns all
files a default release level of *Private*, so an Authorized
Investigator must change the default *Private* release setting to share
a file with people other than their Affiliates or research collaborators
on a specific dataset.

#### Who may upload

Authorized Investigators may upload data, and Authorized Investigators
determine who among their Affiliates may also upload data to Databrary.

#### When to upload

Authorized Investigators need not wait until a research project ends to
upload data to Databrary. Authorized Investigators may upload files to
Databrary as soon as possible after a data collection. This is called
active curation. It distributes the time required to curate a dataset
for sharing and thereby reduces the overall burden of data sharing.

### Sharing data

#### With project collaborators

Authorized Investigators can grant their Affiliates or other Authorized
Investigators on Databrary access to research data and materials stored
on Databrary at any time. The data remain accessible only to the
specific individuals chosen by the Authorized Investigator. That is, all
data, even that marked for wider sharing, remain *Private*. Sharing a
dataset with the larger community of Databrary Authorized Investigators
or the public requires a separate step.

#### With the Databrary community

At a time when the Authorized Investigator chooses---e.g., when a paper
goes to press or a grant period ends---the Authorized Investigator may
choose to share the dataset with the community of Authorized
Investigators on Databrary. This makes each data file contained in the
dataset available to other Authorized Investigators and possibly the
public, but only in accordance with the sharing levels selected by
Authorized Investigators and always subject to the permission granted by
participants. That is, individual data files marked *Private* remain
accessible only to people the Authorized Investigator specifically
selects. Similarly, access to entire datasets labeled *Private* remains
solely under the control of the Authorized Investigator.

To share a dataset, the Authorized Investigator simply changes the
access level on that dataset. Datasets receive a persistent identifier
(DOI) when shared. Authorized Investigators may "unshare" a dataset,
but except under unusual circumstances, this is not considered best
practice.

### Non-human animal data

We are developing guidance for the use of Databrary to store non-human
animal data. Please contact us if you are interested in doing so.

## Removing or altering participant data

Research participants in the European Economic Area (EEA) have certain
rights under the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) pertaining to
the use, sharing, and removal of their personal data.

Since Databrary does not typically store information that maps personal
identities to the data stored on Databrary without a separate agreement,
Authorized Investigators and Institutions are responsible for responding
to any requests to provide copies of, change, restrict access to, or
delete a participant's personal data stored on Databrary. Databrary
cannot guarantee that personal data previously shared on Databrary can
be retrieved from all Authorized Investigators who have accessed the
data. Thus, in seeking permission from research participants to share
personal data via Databrary, Authorized Investigators should communicate
that there are limits to a participant's right to modify or delete
personal data previously shared on Databrary.

## Changing institutions

Authorized Investigators who change institutions must notify Databrary
of the change and its effective date. As soon as possible, the
Authorized Investigator must secure authorization from their new
institution. Authorized Investigators who are awaiting authorization
from their new institution will have access to their own data but not to
non-public data shared by other Authorized Investigators on Databrary.
After an Authorized Investigator has secured approval from their new
institution, full access privileges to Databrary will be restored.

> **NOTE:**
> Your access to non-public data shared by other Authorized Investigators
> will be suspended when you leave your institution.
> This suspension extends to your Affiliates.
> In other words, you and your Affiliates will be only be able to access data that you uploaded.
> Only after your new institution grants authorization will you be able to regain
> access to non-public data shared by other Authorized Investigators.
